
Pseudocode to look up a name in phone book.

0 pick up phone book
1 open to middle of phone book
2 look at names
3 if Smith is among names - (here -if- is a construct by which we are questioning ourselves)
4	call  Mike              (notice the indentation which means only if line-3 is true execute line4)
5 else if Smith is earlier in book
6	open to middle of left half of book
7	go back to step 2
8 else if Smith is later in book
9 	open to middle of right half of book
10	go back to step 2
11else
12	quit -(address this scenario when Smith is not there totally else the program will crash)

the above algorithm is recursive which means the steps in the code gets repeated over and over again until the solution is reached.

Writing Conditional statements using scratch.

[[if x < y then
	say "x is less than y"

Adding nested if and else to the main condition.

if x < y then
	say "x is less than y" -      Scenario 1
else
	if x > Y then
		say "x is greater than y"-Scenario 2
	else
		say "x is equal to y"-    Scenario 3]]]

In the above statement x < y or x > y is a boolean which evaluates it to true or false.
i < 50 can be used to compare number against variables.


	Forever
		say "Hello world!"
The above function is a loop that prints "hello world" infinite number of times
or to make it finite we chane the function to.
	repeat 50
		say "hello world"

Setting variables
	set i = 50

Functions, conditions, boolean expressions, loops, variables, threads and events are all the isdeas that can also be implemented in any programming language.
Multi threaded means when a program does two things at the same time.
Event handlers are used widely in web programming languages.


broadcast message
when I receive message.
These two lines are similar to the event listeners in the Nodejs world of programming.

Eg: To make a meow sound, by Sprite the cat.
we can create a function.

When clicked
play sound meow

To repeat the sound we create a for loop.

when clicked
repeat 3
	play sound meow
but since there is no construct here it does not play 3 times instead plays only once.

when clicked
repeat 3
	play sound meow until done
we rewrote the above program to include the condition until done.
